Just as we can extend a GL category C forward along a lexfunctor from C to D, we can also sometimes extend it backwards along a lexfunctor from D to C; specifically, when the now D-indexed category C1 is furthermore D-small.

In particular, we can take D to be something like the maps X -> []X and squares between these in C, and then the resulting GL-category D should be furthermore an introspective theory.

Something like the maximum introspective theory within C. Does this make introspective theories something like a reflective subcategory of the GL-categories? But beware, the same X may have multiple X -> []X maps available.

This last thing is something like a Freyd cover argument.

---

To prove that the initial arithmetic universe is an introspective theory, we can use a Freyd cover argument that fails for the initial topos, because the Freyd cover of an AU's two projections are both AU morphisms, but only one of the two projections and not the other is a (logical) topos morphism. To see that both projections are AU morphisms, follow through the details that the Freyd cover is an AU in the first place; the constructions of finite limits and colimits and list objects.

We are not particularly concerned about the details of arithmetic universes, so for us, a definition might as well be: A category with finite limits and finite colimits, in which every internal sketch induces an internal free lex theory, all pullback-stably (although the pullback stability does not even really matter for us; also, things like disjointness of coproducts and every equivalence relation being the kernel pair of its coequalizer and so on do not really matter for us. Note that the poset 0 -> 1 is a perfectly fine GL-category, for example!). From this, every finite sketch has an internal model, and also, this is a finite sketch theory, the two properties of note. Put another way, we need four operations: The free internal lex category at all (but this is trivial, this is the 1-object category), augmenting a lex category freely with an object, freely with a morphism, and freely with an equation between morphisms. We also need to be able to prove internally that the free Set-valued model is the one which arises from the lex theory's global elements, hm. All this freeness is really with respect to Set-valued models.